label2,label1,label,reviews
Floral notes,Floral,Blackcurrant_bud,"The buds of the blackcurrant shrub, Ribes nigrum, are used in perfumes and food flavorings. The fragrance of the blackcurrant bud comes from a number of terpenic compounds, including limonene,B-caryophyllene and linalol, as well as sulfur molecules, which have such aromatic potency that they can, when found in large amounts, make products smell of “cat pee”.The blackcurrant bud note unfolds in the fermentation stage under the influence of the metabolism of certain types of yeast.It is often found in white wines made from Sauvignon grapes. In the distillation of whisky, copper tends to eliminate sulfur compounds and therefore reduce the blackcurrant bud perception."
Floral notes,Floral,Geranium,"Geraniumps a herbaceous plant from Africa. There are more than 600 species of geraniums, with a variety of fragrances.The most common one is the decorative geranium cultivated in gardens. Its crumpled leaves give off a distinctive smell, Another geranium grown in window boxes ts ivy-leaved geranium, Pelargoniumpeltatum.Its flowers are not usually very tragrant, Lastly, there is rose geranium,Pelargonium graveolens: the essential oil is rich in citronellol and geraniol and is used in perfumery. The presence of geraniol in certain whiskies likely explains the impression of geranium flowers."
Floral notes,Floral,Honey,"In mythology, honey is the food of gods. In the Bible, itis the food that flows in abundance in the land that God promised the Hebrews. Honey is made by bees using nectar from flowers, or honeydew from certain trees such as fir. It gets its sweetness from several sugars - glucose, fructose, maltose and melezitose.  The aromas of honey vary depending on what plants the bees collect the pollen  or honeydew from. Certain aromatic compounds of flowers and trees leave their stamp on honey. In whisky, the perception of a honey note comes from the presence of esters formed in fermentation and from a few compounds extracted by ethyl alcohol from wood during aging in barrels."
Floral notes,Floral,Rose,"The flower of the rose-tree, one of the most widely grown shrubs in the world, is considered the queen of flowers thanks to its unrivaled variety of beautiful shapes, colors and fragrances. Among the more than 100 species of roses and some 3,000 cultivars, there are two particularly fragrant species: the Damask rose (Rosa damascena) and Provence rose or cabbage rose (Rosa centifolia). The latter's Rose de Mai extracts have established the reputation  of the region around the French city of Grasse and its many perfumers. The absolutes and concretes of both of these roses contain many fragrant molecules, including geraniol, citronellol, 2-phenylethanol (phenethyl alcohol), B-damascenone and B-ionone. Most of these compounds found in various whiskies develop essentially in the fermentation stage.  The rose note is often mentioned by tasters."
Floral notes,Herbaceous,Hay,"The shay used as fodder to feed farm animals, i.e. cattle, sheep, goats  and horses, is made of the grassy part of the plants that grow in the pasture. The typical smell of sun-dried grass comes froma fragrant molecule called coumarin. This molecule, found in abundance in the tonka bean, is widely used to flavor tobacco and sweets. The hay note is rather common in aged red wines. tn whisky, it most likely develops during the aging time in barrels, depending on the type of wine formerly held in the barrel."
Floral notes,Herbaceous,Tobacco_leaf,"Dried leaves of tobacco, Nicotiana tabacum, are used to make smoking  tobacco for cigarettes, pipes and cigars.  Prior to drying, tobacco leaves undergo several processes: fermentation, moistening, cutting, roasting, and saucing or flavoring. The aroma of tobacco highly depends on the nature of flavoring agents. The smell of tobacco is generally associated with burning tobacco leaves, or fire smoldering under dry leaves  in autumn, or the smell of stale smoke in rooms filled with the smoke of pipe smokers. This note is found in certain varieties of coffee. It is due to heterocyclic  compounds formed during the combustion  of lignin and cellulose in the tobacco leaves. In whisky, the perception of this scent is ascribable to aging in barrels."
Floral notes,Herbaceous,Green_grass,"Lawns are planted with green grass, different varieties of graminae for  the most part. When the lawn is mowed, the chopped grass undergoes an enzymatic breakdown, giving rise to an aromatic molecule, c/s-3-hexenol, which smells like greenery, green leaves or green fruit. In wine, it is generally explained by machine harvesting of the grapes and the presence of leaves and stalks along with the grapes when they are pressed. This molecule identified  in malt whiskies probably appears during the fermentation process, depending  on the type of yeast used."
Fruit notes,Fresh fruit,Pineapple,"When nicely ripe, this tropical fruit contains many aromatic molecules typical of esters, namely ethyl butanoate and isoamyl butanoate. In whisky, many ethyl, amyl and isoamyl esters have been identified, and are thought to originate in fermentation with yeast. These compounds give liqueurs their ripe pineapple  note, found in many wines made from late-harvest grapes."
Fruit notes,Fresh fruit,Cherry,"The cherry tree belongs to the Prunus family. Its many varieties give fleshy stone fruit, with different tastes depending on the species (bigarreau, burlat, morello, etc.). Cherries contain many esters and benzaldehyde with a distinctive aroma of bitter almond. Identified in whisky, this benzaldehyde, quite often associated with the taste of cherry pit, most likely comes either from fermentation or the barrel used in aging. The cherry note is also a wonderful expression of young vintage port wines."
Fruit notes,Fresh fruit,Pear,"The European pear, Pyrus communis,  is a fruit tree native to European forests  and cultivated since Antiquity. Pliny  counted 38 varieties of pears. Today we  know of nearly 1,500. They share similar  aromatic profiles, which are most likely  due to a few aromatic compounds,  esters such as hexyl acetate and hepty!  acetate. Identified in whisky, these compounds  form during the fermentation process, in  accordance with the strains of yeast  used. The pear note is often mentioned  in fruity, unpeated whiskies."
Fruit notes,Fresh fruit,Peach,"The peach tree, Prunus persica, is native to China. In ancient times, the peach enjoyed cult status. Along with the rose, the peach became a symbol of youth and beauty, evocative of elegance and sweetness. Ihe molecules engendering the peach aroma are mostly lactones, decalactone, y and 5-undecalactones, and 8-dodecalactone. They are thought to contribute the peach note to the vast majority of botrytised sweet wines, and to dry white wines made from Sauvignon, Marsanne and Chenin grape varieties.  In whisky, y-nonalactone, in association with esters, may bring peach to mind. However, the origin of this note is more likely to be found in the wine previously held in the barrels now used for aging whisky."
Fruit notes,Fresh fruit,Apple,"The many varieties of apples, Wa/us domestica, give our fruit markets an attractive palette of colors, each more appealing than the other. Every different kind of apple has its own unique aroma, and more or less acidity depending on the quantity of malic acid. Several aromatic compounds are found in apples, including ethyl hexanoate, ethyl 3-methylbutanoate, transhex-2-enal and ethanol, mentioned as highly representative of the ripe apple aroma, and cis-hexen-3-ol for the green fruit notes.  In many whiskies and wines, this note is often associated with green apple. All of these molecules develop during fermentation, depending on the strains of yeast used. The apple scent is a basic feature of most white wines, namely fine Chardonnays, Champagnes and Chenins."
Fruit notes,Citrus,Lemon,"Native to South-East Asia, Lemon citrus contains an essential oil rich in limonene. Its special scent is provided by citral, which is constituted of two terpenic aldehydes, neral and geranial. Citral contains large quantities of citric acid. ,  It is most probably the many different acids found in whisky that together conjure up the lemon note, which gives single malt whiskies a light and delicate freshness."
Fruit notes,Citrus,Mandarin,"The mandarin orange, Citrus deliciosa, is a citrus fruit with fine smooth skin, very sweet flesh, little acidity, a delicate fragrance, and lots of seeds. The clementine is a hybrid of the mandarin and sweet orange (Citrus sinensis). While the taste and flavor of these two citrus fruits are very close, the clementine has the advantage of having fewer seeds. The delicate fruity fragrance of the mandarin originates in terpenic hydrocarbons, namely «-pinene and B-pinene, and methyl N-methylanthranilate, the molecule that contributes to the special sweet smell and taste of this fruit.  In whisky, the mandarin note seems to  be associated with a fruity, sweet citrus impression."
Fruit notes,Citrus,Orange,"The sweet orange tree, Citrus sinensis, iS originally from China. The bitter or sour orange, Citrus aurantium, was introduced in the Mediterranean Basin by the Arabs via Persia, while the sweet orange was imported by the Portuguese in the 16 century. It is believed that the golden apples of the garden of the Hesperides in Greek mythology were actually oranges. Cultivated in orangeries for monarchs, orange trees are well adapted to warm temperate climes (Mediterranean countries, Florida, California) where temperatures rarely fall below freezing point. The orange is a sweet, juicy citrus fruit, rich in vitamin C.The fruity, floral fragrance of orange essence is so widely appreciated that it is used to make  many perfumes and to flavor various culinary preparations. The essential oil contains more than 90% limonene, and various aldehydes, in particular octanal, nonanal and decanal, which give off  the typical sweet orange note.  In whisky, the presence of limonene  and aldehydes elicits this very pleasant aroma of orange."
Fruit notes,Citrus,Pomelo,"Pomelos are often confused with grapeftruits. These two citrus fruits grow on different species of trees. The pomelo, Citrus maxima, is a bitter fruit with very thick skin and many seeds, also known as shaddock. The grapefruit has yellow or pink skin and grows in bunches likes grapes, hence its name. It is the fruit of a hybrid tree (Citrus paradisi) of the pomelo and sweet orange, and is consumed fresh or squeezed. Pomelo essence contains nootkatone, the molecule that gives its distinctive aroma to this citrus fruit. Two sulfur molecules, 3-mercaptohexanol and its acetate, are also mentioned as significant compounds in grapefruit aroma.  The bitter taste of certain whiskies, along with the perception of citrus fruit, likely evokes the impression of pomelo."
Fruit notes,Dried fruit,Dried_fig,"The fig is not strictly speaking a fruit, but the pulpy inflorescence of the fig tree (Ficus carica), holding hundreds of  tiny flowers, which grow into seeds after pollination during ripening. Figs are greatly appreciated and eaten in various forms: fresh, dried, cooked, in jams  and pastries. Many different varieties of figs have been cultivated around the Mediterranean since ancient times.  For sweet wine (Sauternes) and muté/fortified wine (Port, Banyuls, Maury), tasters often report a dried fig note, which may develop during barrel aging. In whisky, this perception comes from casks that contained sherry, in particular Pedro Ximenez."
Fruit notes,Dried fruit,Walnut,"The fruit of the walnut tree is enclosed in a fleshy husk, which is used to make walnut liqueurs and wines witha distinctive taste and smell. Sherry, and vin jaune from the French region of Jura, are flor aged wines, left to age in barrels and not topped up. During barrel aging, which may be years, flor yeast develops on the surface of the wine. This causes very slow oxidation of the wine, and produces a fragrant molecule called sotolon, with a strong aroma of fresh walnut. The ethyl alcohol of whisky aged in oak barrels, where sherry has been aged, extracts part of the sotolon absorbed by the wooden barrels and transfers the walnut note to the whisky."
Fruit notes,Dried fruit,Prune,"Prunes are plums, Prunus domestica, dried in ovens at 70 to 80°C for two days. They keep well thanks to their low moisture content, 20 to 22%. During drying, the sugars of the plums undergo a Maillard reaction, and the prunes take on a candied fruit aroma, stronger than that of plums. This aromatic note is often found in a number of aged red wines from sun-basked regions, as well as in liqueurs aged in barrels for a long time. The prune note perceived in whisky has to do with the barrel having  been previously used to age sherry or sometimes port, highly appreciated wines."
Woodsy notes,Ligneous,Oak,"The oak barrel aromatic note is a complex perception, a mix of woodsy, smoky  and slightly spicy. It is redolent of timber yards where staves are seasoned. It consists of many odor molecules: phenols and various heterocyclic compounds. Wood also contains sapid molecules, in particular soluble tannins called ellagitannins, which make a good barrier for oxygen. In barrel making, ellagitanins are partly broken down by the thermal treatment required to bend staves. While whisky ages in barrels, ethyl! alcohol absorbs most of these fragrant molecules, giving the whisky a distinctive woodsy note."
Woodsy notes,Vinous,Sherry,"Sherry (an anglicisation of Jerez) is a fortified wine made in Jerez de la Frontera, Andalusia, Spain. As it matures in oak barrels in contact with air, Sherry slowly oxidizes and develops its special notes, also found in vin jaune, lateharvest white wine from the Jura region in the East of France. During aging, aromatic molecules transfer, not only from the oak wood to the wine, but also conversely from the wine to the  oak wood. When whisky matures in oak barrels formerly used to hold sherry, it absorbs the aromatic molecules from the wine and takes on the pleasant sherry note."
Woodsy notes,Nuts,Toasted_almond,"The almond, Prunus dulcis, is a tree native to western Asia, and cultivated in the Middle East since ancient times. Its seeds in various forms (whole, flaked, paste, toasted or roasted) are used in all sorts of sweets and pastries, as well as in fish, meat, poultry and couscous among other dishes. The toasted almond note is a classic in wine tasting, in particular in fine white wines from Burgundy  and Champagne. It comes about during aging in oak barrels, and continues to develop in the bottle. In whisky, the toasted almond aroma arises from aging in barrels, particularly when they  were previously used for sherry or port."
Woodsy notes,Nuts,Toasted_hazelnut,"A hazelnut, the nut of the hazel, is an oval cobnut very rich in lipids. It is used as brittle, nuts covered in caramelized sugar, in pastries and sweets. When hazelnuts are toasted, numerous aromatic compounds, largely heterocycles, blend into the hazelnut oil, and produce a very delicate aromatic note, both buttery and caramelized.  In the course of the whisky-making process, mainly during aging in barrels, ketones such as diacetyl, that smells like butter, pyrazines and furane-derived compounds, which account for caramel notes, are formed and are captured by ethyl alcohol. These compounds remind us of toasted hazelnut and praline."
Woodsy notes,Nuts,Coconut,"The coconut note is tied to the presence of two cyclic esters called whisky lactones. These compounds develop as oak wood dries slowly. Whisky lactones are not very soluble in water, and are extracted by ethy! alcohol. Their concentration in wines and spirits increases with the time spent aging in barrels. The content of lactones in whisky varies according to the species of oak, the batch of trees, and the location of the forest (Limousin or Vosges in France, United States, etc.). Generally, the American white oak, Quercus alba, gives barrels that contain more whisky lactones than those made from the sessile oak, Quercus petraea. These lactones are found in very low quantities in European oak, Quercus robur, often from Spain’s forests."
Woodsy notes,Vanilla,Caramel,"Caramelization is the browning of sugar, caused by its thermal breakdown. With sucrose, table sugar, all you need to do is add a small amount of water to it and heat it to a temperature close to 186°C, i.e. above the melting point of sugar, and it will start to caramelize. Then you stop the reactions either by cooling it down rapidly, or by adding a bit of water. Many reactions are involved in caramelization and produce a wide variety of compounds, which account for the light to dark brown color, and the typical smell and flavor. The aromatic molecules formed include maltol, ethyl-maltol, furaneol and 5-hydroxymethyl-furfural, a mix that is highly characteristic of the caramel note. When oak staves are heated more or less intensely for bending and making barrels, the same molecules are formed. They are then extracted by ethyl! alcohol in the course of the barrel aging process. The presence of diacetyl in whisky  gives a softer caramel note, more pleasing because it is buttery."
Woodsy notes,Vanilla,Chocolate,"Cocoa beans are quite bitter and not very fragrant. Before they develop a chocolate aroma, they need to be heated toa temperature close to 140°C for about  45 minutes. During roasting, the Maillard reaction leads to the synthesis of a great many aromatic molecules captured by the fat in the cocoa bean, cocoa butter. The final cocoa aroma varies according to the origin of the cocoa beans and  the roasting process. There are multiples variations of this unrivalled aroma, besides dark and milk chocolate.  The origin of the chocolate note in whisky stems from barrel making and aging."
Woodsy notes,Vanilla,Custard,"Custard is a cooked mixture of egg yolks, sugar and hot milk or cream flavored with a vanilla pod. The cooking temperature must not exceed 85°C so as to prevent curdling. This temperature does not produce any caramelization or Maillard reaction. The custard aroma comes from vanilla, the buttery touch of milk or cream and eggs. The flavor of flan or creme anglaise is quite close to custard, unless it is topped with caramel as in creme caramel. The custard note in whisky stems from a set of molecules formed during malting, fermentation and distillation."
Woodsy notes,Vanilla,Vanilla,"Vanilla is a 15-meter-long vine-like orchid native to Mexico. Its fleshy fruits, vanilla pods, are harvested as they mature. A long and delicate curing process is required to develop the vanilla aroma. The main odorous compound resulting from curing, vanillin, generates the aromatic vanilla note. It  has been identified in many wines aged in barrels and in practically all whiskies.  In the making of oak barrels, in particular during charring, the tannins in the wood break down and give rise to a multitude of compounds, including vanillin. Then, when wine or spirit is left to age in barrels for several years, vanillin is slowly extracted trom the wood by ethyl alcohol.  Vanillin content is quite high in the American white oak, Quercus a/ba, and hence in barrels having contained bourbon."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Anise,"Anise notes come from several plants. Two compounds are responsible for these notes: anethole provides a powerful nose of anise, and estragole brings a softer scent of anise. Among plants that contain anethole is anise, also called aniseed (Pimpinel/a anisum), badian or star anise, and fennel. Their extracts  are used to make pastis in France, ouzo in Greece, raki in Turkey and arak in the Fertile Crescent. Herbs that contain a lot of estragole, such as tarragon, chervil and basil, are used for cooking. The anise note is often found in whisky that matured in former bourbon barrels."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Cinnamon,"Cinnamon is obtained from the dried bark of two main species of trees, Sri Lanka (Ceylon) cinnamon, or true cinnamon, Cinnamomum verum, and Chinese cinnamon or Chinese cassia, Cinnamomum cassia. The bark of these trees contains cinnamaldehyde, the organic compound that gives cinnamon its characteristic woodsy flavor and smell. In whisky, as in wine, cinnamaldehyde emanates from the barrel while the whisky is maturing. It is generated when barrels undergo charring. It is then absorbed by alcohol in the course of barrel aging, especially from new barrels. This sweet, suave cinnamon aroma is often found in fine wines and spirits."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Ginger,"Ginger is a perennial herbaceous plant native to India and Malaysia, and cultivated in tropical countries. The underground part, the rhizome, is eaten fresh or candied. From the rhizome is extracted an essential oil, which contains terpenes. Its fragrance is reminiscent of turpentine oil, with its fresh, slightly lemony notes. Ginger also contains gingerols and shogaols, compounds with a hot, sharp taste.  In whisky, the perception of a ginger note probably has to do with the presence  of terpenes, &-pinene, limonene and geraniol, while the hot aspect is due to ethyl alcohol."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Fierbs,"Many whiskies develop a spicy herb note that evokes the garrigue in Provence, with its fragrant thyme, rosemary and sage. The most widespread and best-known species among many different varieties of thyme is common thyme, Thymus vulgaris. This small, highly aromatic shrub grows 20 cm tall in compact tufts. Depending on the rocky terrain where  it grows, it synthesizes various essences. Some are rich in thymol and carvacrol, two terpenic phenols, which give  off the characteristic smell. Thyme is an essential culinary herb around the Mediterranean Basin.  None of the phenols found in thyme essence has so far been identified in whisky, but phenolic compounds that form when barrels are made may explain the olfactory impression of thyme. Sage is acommon Mediterranean plant widely grown throughout Europe. The leaves of the sage shrub, that can grow one meter tall, are used both for culinary and medicinal purposes. In ancient times, it was thought to have life-saving virtues, hence its name, Salvia. In the 14 century, sage was celebrated by the medical school of Salerno: “Why should a man die who has sage in his garden?” And as an English saying goes: “He that would live for aye, must eat sage in May.’ Essence of sage leaves contains thujones, aromatic compounds known to be toxic, also found in Artemisia. The sage  note is characterized by a fresh, slightly camphorated sensation, ascribable to thujones and eucalyptol, which has not been found in whisky. Rosemary also contributes a fresh note, thanks to high quantities of eucalyptol (a.k.a. 1,8-cineol) contained in its essential oil."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Mint,"There is a great number of species and hybrids of mint, all originating in Europe. Two of these are widely consumed  for their aromatic properties and their medicinal qualities, spearmint (Mentha spicata) and peppermint (Mentha piperita). In confectionery and cuisines the world over, mint gives culinary preparations a refreshing and slightly spicy taste. Two aromatic molecules are responsible for this typical note, menthol in peppermint, and L-carvone in spearmint. As regards whisky, it is difficult to associate this note to any particular stage in production."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Nutmeg,"Nutmeg, Myristica fragrans, is a dioecious tree, where male and female flowers grow on separate plants. It is native to the Banda Islands in the Moluccas (or Spice Islands) and reaches 10 to  15 meters in height. It is grown in the Indonesian islands of Amboina, Java, Borneo and Sumatra, in India and in the Caribbean. Its fleshy, pear-shaped fruit, some 5cm long, opens up in half when ripe, and releases a brownish seed, which contains the nutmeg kernel. Mace is made trom the dried orange-brown covering of the seed, aril. Nutmeg and mace have very similar spicy smells, due to terpenic hydrocarbons such as limonene and pinene, which are found in whisky, as well as somewhat toxic compounds such as myristicin and satrole."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Allspice,"Allspice, a small berry the size of a pea, is the fruit of a ten-meter tall tree native to the Greater Antilles and Central America. Its powerful smell evokes clove, mace, nutmeg and pepper, witha slightly woodsy scent. Also known as Jamaica pepper or pimenta, it is called allspice because it is so richly aromatic. It contains 2 to 5% essential oil rich in eugenol that provides the clove note. The other compounds of the essence are similar to those of black pepper and nutmeg. Its leaves are used like bay leaves. In whisky, this note is often part of a complex spicy character."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Black_pepper,"Black pepper, Piper nigrum, the fruit of a flowering vine native to the Malabar Coast of India, is the spice par excellence, rich in hot and spicy compounds, Picked unripe, pepper takes on a nice black color as it dries and its polyphenols oxidize. It contains an essential oil full of terpenic compounds developed as the plant grows, 95% of which are hydrocarbons that give pepper aromatic notes similar to essential oils of pine. The remaining 5% are oxygen compounds that give pepper more floral notes.  In wines, as in whisky, the pepper note indicates a marked spicy dimension."
Woodsy notes,Spicy,Liquorice,"Liquorice is the root of a plant native  to Asia Minor and South-Eastern Europe. It has been known for its medicinal properties in China and Egypt since very ancienttimes. Liquorice extract is rich in coumarin, glycyrrhizin (sweet compound) and glycyrrhizie acid. Liquorice juice is used to make various confectionary  and sweets. The aromatic compounds of liquorice have not been identified in whisky, but barrels sometimes contain cyclotene, a compound produced  when barrels are charred. Its smell is reminiscent of liquorice, tobacco  and walnut. The fragrant liquorice note is often mentioned in port wines, and  their barrels are sometimes used for the aging of whisky. It is therefore likely that the perception of liquorice is due to the thermal degradation of oak wood cellulose."
Woodsy notes,Musty,Earthy,"This is the special smell of freshly turned, humid earth, after a rainstorm. Several molecules are.involved in the perception of this note. Mostly geosmin, and 2-methylisoborneol, give aromas of wet earth, red beetroot, mold, even rot, to products in which they are found. Oct-1-en-3-ol and oct1-en-3-one bring up more of a smell of wet undergrowth and mushroom. These compounds are of microbial origin. In wines, they grow on grapes or during fermentation, and they may also appear in barrels containing mold, generally due to lack of care. In whisky, these molecules probably arise during malting or peating. They may also come trom barrels where some mold has grown."
Grain notes,Cereal grain,Biscuit,"Biscuits (“twice-cooked” by sailors in the Middle Ages) are hard or crisp dry baked goods, made with flour, sugar and eggs, according to a variety of recipes. The thick dough contains little water and undergoes prolonged baking. These are ideal conditions for the Maillard reaction to happen between the sugars and the amino acids of the ingredients. Aromatic notes of toasted cereals and caramel blend together and give the typical biscuit flavor. Several of these aromatic molecules are present in certain whiskies, hence a biscuit note."
Grain notes,Cereal grain,Coffee,"Two main species of coffea are grown for their beans: Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora, better known as Coffea robusta. The fruits, “cherries”, of the coffea, contain two seeds that are not very aromatic. The distinctive aroma  coffee develops when the green coffee beans are roasted. Many molecules are formed by Maillard reaction: furfury! mercaptan, typical of coffee roasteries, diacetyl, typical of the butter note, as well as many phenols, polyphenols and pyrazines, hence the rich variety of coffee aromas. In oak barrel making, staves are heated to be bent. The thermal treatment causes various components of the wood to break down by Maillard reaction, and gives rise to aromatic molecules, many of which are the same as those created in coffee roasting."
Grain notes,Cereal grain,Toast,"The toast note, as well as popcorn, tortilla, nut bread, Basmati or Thai rice notes, is caused by molecules such  as 2-acetyl-pyrroline, 2-acetyl-pyrazine, 2-acetyl-pyrrole and 2-acetyl-pyridine. These compounds, some of which have been identified in whisky, form during a Maillard reaction when grains are roasted, when green malt is kilned, and when barrels are charred and the wood undergoes thermal degradation. This note is often found in fine white wines from Burgundy."
Grain notes,Malty,Malt,"Germinated barley is transformed into malt by drying in a hot air flow in a kiln. In the kilning process, thermal (Maillard) reactions develop between two types of compounds of the germinated barley: simple carbohydrates (e.g. maltose, glucose), commonly called sugars because of their sweetening properties, and amino acids. The Maillard reaction brings about a multitude of different aromatic compounds, the composition of which is highly dependent on drying conditions. These compounds supply  the malt with special roasted grain notes. During distillation, these molecules are partly extracted by alcohol, and the whisky retains a malt aroma."
Grain notes,Oily,Butter,"Cream is left to ferment for one or two  days, and is then made into butter through  churning, which creates a water-in-oil emulsion. Fermentation produces a  molecule called butanedione or diacetyl,  which remains trapped in the fat in the butter. It gives the typical fresh cream and butter note. This molecule can also form through the action of yeast during alcoholic fermentation, or during  the thermal degradation of the wood in barrel making. It has been found in all whiskies."
Grain notes,Oily,Leather,"The leather note is the strong, wild scent of tanned hide one can smell ina leathersmith’s workshop. It differs depending on the origin of the hide,  the types of vegetable tannins used, and the tanner’s technique. Two phenolic compounds are representative of the smell of leather: 4-ethylphenol and phenol, identified in all whiskies and in many wines. Considered as characteristic of an animal note, these phenols are antioxidants that form during the heating and bending of staves. They are extracted from the wood by the ethyl alcohol in whisky during barrel aging. Too strong a dose of 4-ethylphenol is responsible for an odor of horse, stable or saddlery, which is not so pleasant and is considered as a flaw."
Grain notes,Oily,Broiled_meat,"The broiled meat aroma develops when meat is cooked at a temperature close to 200°C. The surface of the meat heats up and dehydrates, which fosters a Maillard reaction between sugars and amino acids in the meat. Aromatic molecules composed mostly of heterocyclic compounds bring about the typical broiled meat aroma. These aromas vary somewhat depending on the type of meat. In whisky, the perception of a meat  note comes from aging in barrels, and therefore the nature of the barrel and its past use."
Phenolic notes,Smoky,Smoked,"The smoke emitted by the combustion of wood is used to dry and preserve meat and prepared meat products. The smoke contains a large number of phenols  and polyphenols, which are formed by reactions of thermal degradation of the constituents of the wood. Smoked products get their special flavor from these organic compounds. When oak barrels are charred, they take on these same aromatic molecules. It is thus only natural that they appear in whisky, as ethyl alcohol extracts part of them during barrel aging. [he odorous compounds of smoke are quite similar to those of peat."
Phenolic notes,Medicinal,Seaweed,"The seaweed note corresponds to the smell of the seaside of the North seas, the Baltic sea, and the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. At low tide, beaches are covered with kelp or wrach, mostly brown algae, the most abundant of which is rockweed, Fucus vesiculosus. Kelp is a great plant fertilizer, rich in sodium and mineral salts. The seaweed note, reminiscent of iodine, is found in the distilleries of the Scottish islands. It is a vegetal note, which brings to mind certain characteristics of the peat  found on these islands."
Phenolic notes,Smoky,Peat,"Peat is formed by the fossilization of plants caused by microorganisms, ata rate of four to five centimeters per century. It is an intermediary step in the conversion of vegetation into coal. Peat  is used in the kilning of green malt, and its combustion smoke gives malt a whole array of aromatic molecules, mostly phenolic compounds. These compounds are taken in by the alcohol that is generated in the fermentation stage, and the whisky takes on a distinctive aroma of peat. Most distilleries of Islay are famous for their traditionally peaty whisky, and many distilleries throughout Scotland now produce both peated  and unpeated versions of their single malt whiskies."
Phenolic notes,Medicinal,Seashell,"Shellfish covers a whole range of edible marine organisms, including sea snails (whelk, periwinkle) and bivalves (oyster, mussel, cockle, clam, warty venus, scallop). They are eaten raw or cooked depending on the culinary habits of different regions of the world. These molluscs, with calcareous shells as exo-skeletons, are redolent of the seaside. Raw oysters contain several molecules that bear a fresh marine scent, e.g. c/s-3-hexenol, octanoic acid, decanal and 2-undecanone. These compounds are formed by the oxidative degradation of unsaturated fatty acids. Some of these are found in whisky, where they form during the fermentation stage. It may be that the island peat, swept by sea spray, conveys such molecules, which exude ocean and seashell, in particular oyster and scallop."
Phenolic notes,Medicinal,Medicinal,"Numerous aromatic compounds (guaiacol, 4-methyl-guaiacol, 4-ethyl-guaiacol, 4-propyl-guaiacol and several cresols) have been identified in whisky. These compounds arise during destructive distillation, when the wood is heated and chemically broken down in a closed vessel. They are part of the composition of wood tar. When barrels are made, particularly when staves are bent, the heat treatment of the wood fosters the synthesis of these compounds. They are then extracted by ethyl alcohol during barrel aging, and give the whisky a medicinal or pharmaceutical note. These molecules are found in all products that undergo thermal treatment, such as coffee or tobacco or peat. Too persistent a presence of the medicinal note in whisky is the sign of a heavily heated barrel."
Phenolic notes,Burnt,Rubber,"Natural rubber is made from the latex of an Amazonian tree, hevea (Hevea brasiliensis) that can grow more than 30 meters tall. Latex is a milky liquid the hevea secretes to fend off attacks and heal wounds. It is collected through  an incision in the bark of the tree, and vulcanized using heat and sulfur, which produces atypical smell of rubber. A molecule called ethy! furfurylmercapto3-propionate replicates the smell of rubber as it is found in certain coffees. In peaty whisky, the rubber note, reminiscent of burnt tires, likely comes from aging in oak barrels. When discrete, itis rather pleasant."
Phenolic notes,Burnt,Tar,"Tar is a product obtained by pyrolysis of wood, generally pine, or peat or brown coal or hard coal. Pine tar, known  as Stockholm tar, is a potent antiseptic, used to treat trees against insects,  and to care for the hooves of horses and donkeys. Tar is a blackish, viscous substance, composed of aromatic hydrocarbons and phenolic compounds. Among compounds responsible for  the strong, unmistakable smell of tar are naphtalene, pyrene, anthracene, phenols and many polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, some of which are highly toxic. In the process of barrel making, particularly charring, the very same compounds arise, and may then very well be partly extracted by the ethyl! alcohol in whisky in the course of aging."
Phenolic notes,Burnt,Sulfur,"The perception of a sulfur note is caused by the presence of various sulfurcontaining compounds: sulfur, hydrogen sulfide, sulfides, disulfides, thiols, etc. These molecules cause mostly unpleasant odors, such as hydrogen sulfide in rotten eggs, methanethiol that reeks of stagnant water, ethanethiol in rotting onions, and 3-methylbut-2-ene-1-thiol in skunky or lightstruck beer. Yet these sulfur compounds can also produce highly pleasant smells, like that of a coffee roastery with 2-furanmethanthiol,  or fragrant notes found in all Alliaceae, such as fried onions, chives, and leek consommeé. These sulfur notes are described as flaws and appear in beer and wine due to oxidation from exposure to air and light in the bottle. But these molecules can also stem from chemical reactions in the course of fermentation and preservation. Sulfur-containing compounds can also be produced when empty casks are sulfured (burning sulfur sticks as an antiseptic). The sulfur  note is often mentioned in malt whiskies, notably those matured in first-fill  sherry casks. This is not surprising since many sulfur molecules have been identified in whisky, including dimethyl disulfide, dimethyl trisulfide, methionol, methional and thiophene."
Woodsy notes,Ligneous,Resinous,"In whisky, a resinous perception brings to mind pine and Tir notes, with a fresh touch reminiscent of eucalyptus. In the course of aging, in contact with certain types of wood, whisky probably absorbs terpene compounds (a-pinene, B-pinene and limonene), which make up turpentine oil and its distinctive scent of pine."